The fstrim command is used to reclaim unused space on a mounted file system. It helps maintain the performance and longevity of storage devices like SSDs or eMMC by informing the device which blocks of data are no longer in use. Here's a breakdown of the commands:

1. fstrim -v /cache

Trims the /cache partition.

The -v option provides verbose output, showing how much space was trimmed.

The /cache partition is typically used by Android for temporary storage (e.g., system updates, app cache).


2. fstrim -v /data

Trims the /data partition.

This is where user-installed apps, app data, and user data are stored. Regular trimming ensures optimal performance for read/write operations.


3. fstrim -v /system

Trims the /system partition.

This partition contains the Android operating system and system applications. While it doesn’t change frequently, trimming ensures any space freed by system updates is properly reclaimed.


Benefits of Using fstrim:

Performance: Reclaims unused blocks, improving storage device performance.

Efficiency: Helps prevent fragmentation and slowdowns.

Device Longevity: Reduces unnecessary write operations, extending the life of SSDs or eMMC storage.


These commands are typically run manually or scheduled via automation (e.g., periodic maintenance scripts) to maintain storage efficiency.


FAQs on fstrim Command

1. What is the fstrim command?

The fstrim command is used to inform storage devices, such as SSDs or eMMC, which blocks of data are no longer in use. This helps improve device performance and extend its lifespan.


---

2. Why should I use fstrim?

Using fstrim:

Reclaims unused storage space.

Optimizes read/write performance.

Reduces wear and tear on SSDs or eMMC, prolonging their lifespan.



---

3. What does the -v option do in fstrim?

The -v option stands for "verbose." It displays detailed information about how much space was trimmed on the specified partition.


---

4. What do /cache, /data, and /system refer to?

/cache: Temporary storage for system updates, app cache, and logs.

/data: Contains user-installed apps, app data, and user files.

/system: Houses the Android operating system and system apps.



---

5. Can I execute fstrim for multiple partitions?

Yes. you can do on following partition
/cache
/data
/system


---

6. Is fstrim safe to use?

Yes, fstrim is safe to use. It only marks unused blocks for reclamation and does not delete active data.


---

7. How often should I run fstrim?

You can run it periodically (e.g., weekly or monthly) depending on your device usage. Modern systems often handle trimming automatically.


---

8. Does fstrim delete data?

No, fstrim does not delete active data. It only clears unused blocks that are no longer needed by the file system.


---

9. Can I automate fstrim?

Yes, you can automate fstrim using powerful systemless module


---

10. What happens if I don't use fstrim?

Without trimming:

Your device may experience slower read/write speeds over time.

Storage performance might degrade, especially on SSDs or eMMC.



---

11. Can I run fstrim on other partitions?

Yes, you can run fstrim on any mounted partition that supports it. Replace the path (e.g., /cache, /data) with the desired partition.


---

12. How do I know if fstrim worked?

When you use the -v option, fstrim will display the amount of space it successfully reclaimed.


---

